CHAPTER III.

INTERPRETATIONS AND TRANSFORMATIONS OF QUATERNION EXPRESSIONS.

94. Among the most useful characteristics of the Calculus of Quaternions, the ease of interpreting its formulae geometrically, and the extraordinary variety of transformations of which the simplest expressions are susceptible, deserve a prominent place. We devote this Chapter to some of the more simple of these, together with a few of somewhat more complex character but of constant occurrence in geometrical and physical investigations. Others will appear in every succeeding Chapter. It is here, perhaps, that the student is likely to feel most strongly the peculiar difficulties of the new Calculus. But on that very account he should endeavour to master them, for the variety of forms which any one formula may assume, though puzzling to the beginner, is of the utmost advantage to the advanced student, not alone as aiding him in the solution of complex questions, but as affording an invaluable mental discipline.

95. If we refer again to the figure of $\S 77$ we see that

$$
\begin{aligned}
& O C=O B \cos A O B, \\
& C B=O B \sin A O B .
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence, if $\overline{O A}=\alpha, \quad \overline{O B}=\beta$, and $\angle A O B=\theta$, we have

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
O B=T \beta, & O A=T \alpha, \\
O C=T \beta \cos \theta, & C B=T \beta \sin \theta .
\end{array}
$$

Hence

$$
S_{\bar{\alpha}}^\beta=\frac{O C}{O A}=\frac{T \beta}{T \alpha} \cos \theta
$$

Similarly

$$
T V \frac{\beta}{\alpha}=\frac{C B}{O A}=\frac{T \beta}{T \alpha} \sin \theta .
$$

Hence, if $\eta$ be a unit-vector perpendicular to $\alpha$ and $\beta$, and such that positive rotation about it, through the angle $\theta$, turns $\alpha$ towards $\beta$, or

$$\eta=\frac{U \overline{C B}}{U \overline{O A}}=U \frac{\overline{C B}}{\overline{O A}}=U V \frac{\beta}{\alpha}$$,

we have $V \frac{\beta}{\alpha}=\frac{T \beta}{T \alpha} \sin \theta \cdot \eta . \quad$ (See, again, $\left.\S 84.\right)$

96. In the same way, or by putting

$$
\begin{aligned}
\alpha \beta & =S \alpha \beta+V a \beta \\
& =S \beta \alpha-V \beta \alpha \\
& =a^2\left(S \frac{\beta}{\alpha}-V \frac{\beta}{\alpha}\right) \\
& =T \alpha^2 \cdot\left(-S \frac{\beta}{\alpha}+V_\alpha^\beta\right),
\end{aligned}
$$

we may shew that
$\begin{aligned} S \alpha \beta & =-T \alpha T \beta \cos \theta, \\ T V \alpha \beta & =T \alpha T \beta \sin \theta,\end{aligned}$

and
$V a \beta=T \alpha T \beta \sin \theta \cdot \eta$

where
$\eta=U V \alpha \beta=U(-V \beta \alpha)=U V \frac{\beta}{\alpha}$

Thus the scalar of the product of two vectors is the continued product of their tensors and of the cosine of the supplement of the contained angle.

The tensor of the vector of the product of two vectors is the continued product of their tensors and the sine of the contained angle; and the versor of the same is a unit-vector perpendicular to both, and such that the rotation about it from the first vector (i. e. the multiplier) to the second is left-handed or positive.

Hence also TV $\alpha \beta$ is double the area of the triangle two of whose sides are $\alpha, \beta$.




105. The expression $\quad \rho=\alpha \beta \alpha^{-1}$ obviously denotes a vector whose tensor is equal to that of $\beta$.
But we have

$$
S \cdot \beta a \rho=0,
$$

so that $\rho$ is in the plane of $\alpha, \beta$.

Also we have

$$
S \alpha \rho=S \alpha \beta,
$$

so that $\beta$ and $\rho$ make equal angles with $\alpha$, evidently on opposite sides of it. Thus if $\alpha$ be the perpendicular to a reflecting surface and $\beta$ the path of an incident ray, $-\rho$ will be the path of the reflected ray.

Another mode of obtaining these results is to expand the above expression, thus, $\S 90$ (2),
$$\begin{aligned} \rho & =2 \alpha^{-1} S \alpha \beta-\beta \\ & =2 \alpha^{-1} S \alpha \beta-\alpha^{-1}(S x \beta+V \alpha \beta) \\ & =\alpha^{-1}(S \alpha \beta-V \alpha \beta),\end{aligned}$$
so that in the figure of $\S 77$ we see that if $\overline{O A}=\alpha$, and $\overline{O B}=\beta$, we have $\overline{O D}=\rho=\alpha \beta \alpha^{-1}$.
Or, again, we may get the result at once by transforming the equation to ${ }_\alpha^\rho=K\left(\alpha^{-1} \rho\right)=K \frac{\beta}{\alpha}$.








109. We have seen in $\S 95$ that a quaternion may be divided into its scalar and vector parts as follows :-
$$\frac{\beta}{\alpha}=S \frac{\beta}{\alpha}+V \frac{\beta}{\alpha}=\frac{T \beta}{T \alpha}(\cos \theta+\epsilon \sin \theta)$$
where $\theta$ is the angle between the directions of $\alpha$ and $\beta$, and $\epsilon=U V \frac{\beta}{\alpha}$
is the unit-vector perpendicular to the plane of $\alpha$ and $\beta$ so situated that positive (i. e. left-handed) rotation about it turns $\alpha$ towards $\beta$.
Similarly we have (ยง96)

$$
\begin{aligned}
\alpha \beta & =S \alpha \beta+V \alpha \beta \\
& =T \alpha T \beta(-\cos \theta+\epsilon \sin \theta)
\end{aligned}
$$

$\theta$ and $\epsilon$ having the same signification as before.

